Artificial Intelligence, more commonly known as AI, isn’t a new topic and has been around for years; however, those who have tracked its’ progress have noted that 2017 is the year that has seen it accelerate than years previously.  This hot topic has made its’ way into the media, in boardrooms and within the government.  One reason for this is things that haven’t functioned for decades has suddenly began to work; this is going beyond embedded functions or just tools and expectations are high for 2018.
There are several reasons why this year has recorded the most progress when working with AI.  Before going into these four preconditions that allowed AI to progress over the past five years, it is important to understand what Artificial Intelligence means.  Then, we can take a closer look at each of the four preconditions and how they will shape what is to come next year.
What is Artificial Intelligence?
Basically, Artificial Intelligence is defined as the science of making computers do things that require intelligence when done by humans.  However, five decades have gone by since AI was born and progress in the field has moved very slowly; this has created a level of appreciation to the profound difficulty of this problem.  Fortunately, this year has seen considerable progress and has opened the probability of further advancement in 2018.
Preconditions That Allowed AI to Succeed in 2017 and Beyond
Everything is presently becoming connected with our devices, such as being able to start a project on your Desktop PC and then able to finish your work on a connected smartphone or tablet.  Ray Kurzweil believes that eventually, humans will be able to use sensors that connects our brains to the cloud.  Since the internet originally connected to computers and has advanced to connecting to our mobile devices, sensors that already enable buildings, homes and even our clothes to be linked to the internet can in our near future expand to be used to connect our minds into the cloud.
Another component for AI becoming more advanced is due to computing becoming freer to use.  Previously, it would be costly for new chips to come out during an eighteen-month-period at twice the speed; however, Marc Andreessen claims that new chips are being processed at the same speed but only at half of the cost.  The theory is that the future will see inexpensive processors at an inexpensive price so that a processor will be in everything; computing capacity will be able to solve problems that had no solution five years prior.
Another component for the advancement of AI is that data is becoming the new oil, which has been made available digitally over the past decade.  Since data can be retrieved through our mobile devices and can be tracked through sensors, new sources of data have appeared through video, social media and digital images.  Conditions that could only be modeled at an elevated level in the past can now be described more accurately due to the almost infinite set of real data that is available; this means accuracy will increase more soon.
Finally, the fourth component that has contributed towards AI advancement is that machine learning is transforming into the new combustion engine as it is accomplished through using mathematical models and algorithms to discover patterns that are implicit in data.  These complex patterns are used by machines to solve on their own whether a new data is similar, that it fits or can be used to predict future outcomes.  Virtual assistants use AI, such as Siri and Cortana, to solve equations and predict outcomes every day with great accuracy; virtual assistants will continue to be used in 2018 and beyond as well as what they will be able to accomplish the more AI continues to grow and evolve.
Artificial Intelligence has seen much improvements than in previous decades.  This year, many experts were amazed and excited about how AI has progressed from the many decades since its’ birth.  Now, we can expect 2018 to see advancements in work, school and possibly in self-driving cars that can result in up to ninety percent fewer car accidents; welcome to the future of Artificial Intelligence.